Draft for relax_const_restrictions (#1)
Noratrieb/rfcs: text/0000-relax-const-restrictions.md

- Feature Name: relax_const_restrictions
- Start Date: 2022-10-06
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow `const` functions to behave differently during constant-evaluation and runtime and remove all restrictions from `const` functions if they are called at runtime.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> The past restriction of `const` functions having to behave the same way no matter where they were called has been a limitation and soundness issue. While the Rust language does, at the time of writing, not expose a way to determine whether a function has been called during constant evaluation or runtime (and this RFC does not propose adding such a feature), such an intrinsic (`const_eval_select`) does currently exist internally in `rustc`.

Reviewer: "soundness issue" is very general. Maybe "has been unclear whether such a difference in behaviour could cause unsoundness".

At the time of writing, there is no way for a function to detect whether it was called at runtime or during constant evaluation in stable Rust and this RFC is not concerned with adding any, but it encourages future RFCs for adding this capability.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

This RFC introduces a new concept called the "constness-context" of an execution of a function. A `const fn` is executed in a constant evaluation constness-context if it was called in a context where only `const fn` are allowed (like `static` initializers) or inside another `const fn` that was executed in a const constness-context. All other calls to a `const fn` (for example in `main`) are in a runtime constness-context.

A `const fn` is now allowed to exhibit different behavior depending on it being called in a constant evaluation or runtime constness-context. Language features and standard library functions may also differ in behavior depending on the constness-context they have been used or called in.

The constness-context of a function is therefore observable behavior.

> If a `const fn` is called in a runtime constness-context, no additional restrictions are applied to it, and it may do anything a non-`const fn` can (for example, calling into FFI).

Reviewer: I love this section. It mirrors what my effect systems PR (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/101900) implements. So, let's enumerate all the variants:

* always constness context (`static` initializers, array length, ...)
* maybe constness context (another `const fn`)
* not constness context (any runtime function)

We should probably also update the reference (which just talks about const contexts, but merges "maybe" and "always" together

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

There are two main drawbacks to this RFC.

> Firstly, pure `const fn` under the old rules can be seen as a simple optimization opportunity for naive optimizers, as they could just reuse constant evaluation for `const fn` if the argument is known at compile time, even if the function is in a runtime context. This RFC makes such an optimization impossible. This is not seen as a problem by the author, as a more advanced optimizer (like LLVM) is able to remove these calls at compile time through means other than Rust's constant evaluation (inlining and constant folding). Also, a constant evaluation system can still evaluate executions in a runtime constness-context, as long as it behaves exactly like runtime.

Reviewer: more concretely: the optimizer can run a purity checker that isn't bound by back-compat issues or other language concerns. So it can look a the bodies of functions and mark them as pure without changing the body of a (const or not) function becoming a breaking change for a library.

Secondly, with the current rules around `const fn` purity, unsafe code could choose to only sometimes call unknown `const fn` code at runtime depending on whether it needs the result. The author does not see this as a significant drawback, as this functionality is better served by language features that target this use case directly (like a `pure` attribute) and is therefore out of scope for the language feature of "functions evaluatable at compile time".

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

An alternative is to keep the current rules. This is bad because the current rules are highly restrictive and don't have a significant benefit to them.

It would also be possible to allow them to behave differently, but keep the restrictions around purity and determinism at runtime. This would still allow unsafe code to treat `const fn` specially, but this is not seen as a desirable feature of `const fn`.

# Prior art

> [prior-art]: #prior-art

Reviewer: another prior art is that Rust *removed* pure functions and the discussion was always "const is not pure through the backdoor" as long as I can remember

Reviewer 2: >  the discussion was always "const is not pure through the backdoor" as long as I can remember

To be fair, I don't think that is accurate. In fact former lang team member Centril definitely hoped for `const fn` to also mean 'pure'. I think this was a case of keeping our options open to see which alternative would bring the bigger benefits.

But I agree that the benefits of const_eval_select and float-in-const outweigh the benefit of having pure functions in Rust -- way more people came asking for being able to do more things in `const` than for being able to write unsafe code with a safe API that imposes purity restrictions on users.

Author: The [RFC for unreserving `pure`](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2421-unreservations-2018.html#1-effects) explicitly says
> Here, pure denotes a deterministic function -- but we already have const for more or less the same, and it is unlikely that we would introduce an effect (or restriction thereof) that is essentially const fn but not entirely. So this use case is unlikely to happen.

So `const` was considered to be roughly equivalent to `pure`. TheRFC was also written by Centril

Reviewer 2: I take this to mean that Centril didn't want to have `pure` *separate* from `const fn`, but preferred to handle both of these concerns with one keyword/mechanism.

C++ with `constexpr`, a compile-time evaluation system similar to Rusts `const fn`, has a [`std::is_constant_evaluated`](std-is-constant-evaluated) function which can be used to determine whether the function is being executed during constant evaluation or at runtime. It does not impose restrictions that code has to behave the same during constant evaluation or runtime.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> Do we want to allow `const fn` evaluated during constant evaluation to behave nondeterministically?

Reviewer: That's already impossible. The const evaluator is completely deterministic and that is required for type system soundness. (`let x: [u8; C] = [42; C];` must always evaluate both `C` to the same value)

Rust code often contains debug assertions or preconditions that must be upheld but are too expensive to check in release mode. It is desirable to also check these preconditions during constant evaluation (for example with a `debug_or_const_assert!` macro). This is unsound under the old rules, as this would be different behavior during const evaluation in release mode. This RFC allows such debug assertions to also run during constant evaluation (but does not propose this itself).

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

This RFC allows `const fn` to exhibit different behavior during constant evaluation and runtime. While such a difference is often undesirable, it is not considered to be undefined behavior.

If a `const fn` is able to detect whether it has been called during constant evaluation or at runtime (either through an intrinsic or a future language feature), then it is allowed to exhibit different behavior. Also, a `const fn` called at runtime can do anything a normal function can do, with no additional restrictions applied to it. It could open a file, call a system randomness API or gracefully exit the program. 

> At the time of writing, there is no way for a function to detect whether it was called at runtime or during constant evaluation in stable Rust and this RFC is not concerned with adding any, but it encourages future RFCs for adding this capability.

Reviewer 2: I would say "unblocks" instead of "encourages". The point of this RFC is that it gets a roadblock out of the way for float-in-const stabilization or stably exposing something like const_eval_select.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> This RFC introduces a new concept called the "constness-context" of an execution of a function. A `const fn` is executed in a const constness-context if it was called in a context where only `const fn` are allowed (like `static` initializers) or inside another `const fn` that was executed in a const constness-context. All other calls to a `const fn` (for example in `main`) are in a runtime constness-context.

Reviewer 2: It's not really new, we called it "to be or not to be in const-context" so far. But it probably hasn't been spelled out in an RFC before. ;)

> A `const fn` is executed in a const constness-context if it was called in a context where only `const fn` are allowed

This sounds somewhat recursive: I would start by explicitly enumerating the 'roots' of const-contexts:
- const
- static
- array lengths
- enum discriminants
- const generic values

And then say that all code executed there, including the functions being called (which must be `const fn`), are running in const-context.

Reviewer 2: "runtime constness-context" sounds very odd, I think "runtime context" is less confusing.

We can therefore say that code can either be:
- Always in a const constness-context (for example `static` initializers, array lengths...)
- Maybe in a const constness-context (`const fn`), where the constness-context can differ between calls depending on the call-site
- Always in a runtime const constness-context (non-`const` functions)

A `const fn` is now allowed to exhibit different behavior depending on it being called in a const or runtime constness-context. Language features and standard library functions may also differ in behavior depending on the constness-context they have been used or called in.

This makes the constness-context of a function observable behavior.

If a `const fn` is called in a runtime constness-context, no additional restrictions are applied to it, and it may do anything a non-`const fn` can (for example, calling into FFI).

> A `const fn` being called in a const constness-context will still be required to be deterministic, as this is required for type systme soundness.

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that this is enforced by the compiler, so even unsafe code has no way of breaking this requirement.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Pure `const fn` under the old rules can be seen as a simple optimization opportunity for naive optimizers, as they could just reuse constant evaluation for `const fn` if the argument is known at compile time, even if the function is in a runtime context. This RFC makes such an optimization impossible. This is not seen as a problem by the author, as a more advanced optimizer (like LLVM) is able to remove these calls at compile time through means other than Rust's constant evaluation (inlining and constant folding). Also, a constant evaluation system can still evaluate executions in a runtime constness-context, as long as it behaves exactly like runtime. The optimizer could also manually annotate functions as being truly pure by looking at the body.

> Secondly, with the current rules around `const fn` purity, unsafe code could choose to only sometimes call unknown `const fn` code at runtime depending on whether it needs the result. The author does not see this as a significant drawback, as this functionality is better served by language features that target this use case directly (like a `pure` attribute) and is therefore out of scope for the language feature of "functions evaluatable at compile time". This could break code that already relies on this, but since Rust doesn't have proper support for this, the impact should be minimal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondly, with the current rules around `const fn` purity, unsafe code could choose rely on purity, e.g. by caching function return values and assuming this is not observable to clients. The author does not see this as a significant drawback, as this functionality is better served by language features that target this use case directly (like a `pure` attribute) and is therefore out of scope for the language feature of "functions evaluatable at compile time". This could break code that already relies on this, but since Rust doesn't have proper support for this, the impact should be minimal.
```

Secondly, with the current rules around `const fn` purity, unsafe code could choose rely on purity, e.g. by caching function return values and assuming this is not observable to clients. The author does not see this as a significant drawback, as this functionality is better served by language features that target this use case directly (like a `pure` attribute) and is therefore out of scope for the language feature of "functions evaluatable at compile time". This could break code that already relies on this, but since Rust doesn't have proper support for this, the impact should be minimal.

The old rules, which say that `const fn` always has to behave the same way are already well-known in the community. Changing this will require teaching people about the new change. Since this is a very simple change, this should be easy.

> This is technically a breaking change. Code could rely on this behavior right now, as the [internal documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.65.0/std/intrinsics/fn.const_eval_select.html#safety) for `std::intrinsics::const_eval_select` explains. But this will not be a problem problem in practice, because all `const fn` written prior to this RFC (and also for quite some time after it until an actual way to distinguish between const eval and runtime is added) are guarateed to behave the same still. So code relying on code written prior to this RFC will still run just fine afterwards, although it did get theoretically unsound. The dependency could then of course update and introduce such difference, but this happening in practice is _highly_ unlikely and would probably require a major version bump anyways as changing behavior generally requires a major version bump.

Reviewer 2: The concern is someone taking an old previously sound crate and now using it with a function that violates the guarantee. That doesn't require a major version bump anywhere.

I agree this is unlikely though, but I don't follow most of this paragraph.^^ I would just say that
- relying on this has never been officially endorsed, so technically people were relying on an unspecified aspect of the type system
- there are no known cases of code relying on this, so really this question is hypothetical and we mention this only for the sake of completeness
